Add "Welcome to mgmt" user guide (#11)
purpleidea/mgmtconfig.com: content/docs/guide/welcome-to-mgmt.md

# Welcome to mgmt config

This document will guide you through your first steps learning how to use mgmt while exploring its behavior and programming syntax with real examples and real use cases.

> mcl is a strongly-typed, functional language that we use to program in mgmt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mcl is a strongly-typed, reactive, functional language that we use to program in mgmt.
```

This guide is designed to teach you the syntax and concepts necessary to find successful using mgmt on your first day.

# Table of Contents 

{{< toc >}}

# Preface (for editors)

> 📚 Design of this document:
>
> - A gradual introduction with each section building on the previous.
> - Real examples demonstrating what was just covered.

> > - Avoiding jargon, especially internal implementation details, such as “DAG”, unless absolutely necessary. As an example, [Elm](https://guide.elm-lang.org) does a fantastic job of explaining how to use a functional programming language *without* burdening the reader in high-level mathematical terms that are unavoidable in language docs like Haskell. It’s OK to refer to these technical terms, “in mgmt, this is called x”

Reviewer: I love the "notes to editor" type thing. Perhaps you can store any notes for this and future docs in an unlisted "editing.md" file or similar as a good reminder and so others have a guide to contribute?

Even tool use like how to build the graph diagrams and more is all welcome too.

Side note: a haskell pro that has consulted on some of the FRP stuff with me points out that I don't always use the standard industry terms, and I've done so intentionally since they're sometimes cryptic if you're not in that niche community. So instead I've tried to make it more approachable.

Author: > So instead I've tried to make it more approachable.

I have found mgmt to be approachable, so I think you're succeeding!

Author: For notes-to-editor kind of stuff, I've created a small stub document (contributing-docs.md) and also moved some of this text to an html comment inside the welcome-to-mgmt.md so that editors may see it but it won't be rendered on the website.

> ⚠️ EDITING TODO: Review for consistent use of terminology:

> > - Verbs:  a resource *executes*, right?

Reviewer: executes or applies a state. Resources also Watch state.

> > - Terminology overload: Notify in mcl, Refresh internal to mgmt, and in this document, Signalling. I also use ‘signalling’ to include send/recv.

Reviewer: Notify vs. Refresh: The notification causes a refresh. Refresh is resource specific.

I don't see the word signal elsewhere in this doc, which works, because it isn't what I'd definitively use for send/recv, but lmk if there's a sentence to review.

Author: re: signal, I originally had send/recv plus notify examples in scope for this document, but I decided it wasn't necessary to really have baseline success with mgmt, so I removed it... except for this comment lol thank you for catching that.

> > - Should we use tabs for indenting code here? If so, we should also add css to set tab-size.

Reviewer: Yes please tabs. Eight is what I use, but the beauty is that it's a personal choice. Happy to use 4 in docs if you think that's more common.

Author: +1 I'm happy to use tabs w/ default tab-size. Out of scope, but possibly useful, to check how the site renders on mobile devices (an 8-space tab is ... a lot of screen space on a phone) and maybe tweak the tab-size for small screens at some point in the future.

Reviewer: Good idea! I have no idea how to do this, but makes a lot sense.

Author: ok I think i've got tabs for indentation now. I wrote a little one-liner to help find places where indentation might be wrong and included it in the comment at the top of the guide.

`awk '/^\s*```puppet/ { mcl=1; next } /^\s*```\s*$/ { mcl=0 } mcl == 1 && /^[ ]+[A-Za-z0-9#]/ { print NR, $0 }' welcome-to-mgmt.md`

## Resource Basics

Configuration is described with an element called a **resource**.
Most kinds of resources in mgmt will be familiar to you and are intended to align with your mental model of your infrastructure: ensuring that a package is installed, a service is disabled, or a user exists.

Resources have three parts: a kind, a name, and parameters (mgmt calls these 'params'). The following example code shows a single file _resource_:

> ```puppet { .m-2 }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```mcl { .m-2 }
```

(and throughout)

Author: This can be done but I will have to check out how to make Hugo/chroma apply syntax highlighting since it doesn’t know “mcl” and it does know “puppet”

Reviewer: Yeah, I will find a way to fix this hopefully sooner rather than later so that everything then starts working better by merge or soon after I hope!

file "/tmp/hello.txt" {

>   content => "Greetings from mgmt!",

Reviewer: newline at the end?
```suggestion
  content => "Greetings from mgmt!\n",
```

Keyword: When all resources reach the desired state, **mgmt calls this outcome "converged".**

### Running mgmt

Our _mcl_ code can be executed in mgmt: `mgmt run lang <path>`. Mgmt will normally write its logs to stdout, so the execution of our file resource will appear like this:

```text { .m-2 }
$ mgmt run lang hello.mcl

... ( other output omitted for brevity ) ...

10:28:48 engine: file[/tmp/hello.txt]: copy 21 bytes
```

When you run this, notice the following:
* mgmt did not exit after converging (more on this in the next section)
* mgmt can run as any user, but that user will correct permissions in order to execute some resources.
* The first part '10:28:48' is a timestamp, and your timestamps will be different.

Let's verify that our file was created correctly, and run the following in another terminal:

```text { .m-2 }
$ cat /tmp/hello.txt
Greetings from mgmt!
```

### Continuous Convergence

In the example above, mgmt stayed running even after converging. This is because mgmt continuously watches for changes (divergence) and will respond immediately and as needed.

> Let's explore that! While mgmt is still running, we can modify the file in another terminal and observe mgmt's immediate responses:

Reviewer: This is the classic example, but there's an important subtlety that maybe you know of a way to add to this messaging...

"malicious/byzantine interference" (like deleting a file) will often be fine and the system will repair, but it's not the goal of mgmt, and in theory there are (rare) situations where you can cause an undesirable thing to happen as a result of such interference.

We track the state so that we don't need to unnecessarily re-CheckApply every graph swap, and as a consequence, we often get the neat behaviour.

> Let's explore that! While mgmt is still running, we can modify the file in another terminal and observe mgmt's immediate responses:

Reviewer: Feels so friendly, I love it!

```bash-session { .m-2 }
# Remove the file
$ rm /tmp/hello.txt

# mgmt notices and responds:
10:36:34 engine: file[/tmp/hello.txt]: copy 21 bytes

# Change the file's contents
$ echo "mgmt is fast" > /tmp/hello.txt

# mgmt notices and responds:
10:37:18 engine: file[/tmp/hello.txt]: copy 21 bytes
```

You can terminate mgmt in your terminal by pressing ctrl+c.

Each time we removed or modified the file, mgmt notices that the file has diverged from its desired state, and it takes action immediately to resolve it.

## Resource Syntax

Resource definition syntax in mcl looks like this:

```puppet { .m-2 }
# This is a comment
kind "name" {
  # All params must end with a comma
  param1 => value1,

  # Including the final param
  param2 => value2,
}

> # Did you know? mgmt has some internal resources 
> # like a web server and it can serve files over http? :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Did you know? mgmt has many built-in resources 
# including a web server which can serve files over http? :)
```

> http:server "127.0.0.1:8080" { }

Reviewer: <3

```

💡 _What’s in a name?_  Many resources use the name as a default value for a param. The file resource uses name as the default value for the `path` param.

⚠️Syntax Caution: In a resource, every param must have a trailing comma, including the last one.

The example above can also be written with a different name and setting the path explicitly:

```puppet { .m-2 }
file "a greeting" {

>   content => "Greetings from mgmt!",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  content => "Greetings from mgmt!\n",
```

  path => "/tmp/hello.txt",
  state => "exists",
}
```

mgmt has many kinds of resources, such as 
[pkg](/docs/resources/#pkg) for packages, 
[exec](/docs/resources/#exec) for running other programs, 
[svc](/docs/resources/#svc) for managing service. Check out [the resources reference for more](/docs/resources/)

Can resources be remote or only local? mgmt resources do not have a concept of local or remote. While _file_ and _pkg_ will execute locally on a machine, some resources will involve remote services, such as an ec2 instance resource. You can even export resource definitions from one mgmt to be executed by mgmt on another machine.

> ⁉️Questions for the editor 
> 

> > Question: Some resources are driven by external events (file w/ inotify), but others use timers. How frequently is a resource checked? How would the reader learn that? Should the reader not worry about it?

Reviewer: I generally suppose the reader not worry about it. Assume the magic happens when it happens. The one exception is if you use `Meta:poll` in which case, be mindful about how often you're causing re-checks.

If it matters about how the Watch() mechanism works per resource, then we should put something in the docs for that resource. We have in some cases, and any that are missing something is a bug.

### Packages

Let's dive into the _pkg_ resource for managing system packages. This example also introduces two mgmt features: a behavior called "autogrouping", and an mcl syntax for lists.

```puppet { .m-2 }
# Ensure two different packages are installed
pkg "tmux" {
  state => "installed",
}

pkg "cowsay" {
  state => "installed",
}
```

Package management may require root, so we can invoke mgmt with sudo to run this example, after writing the above into a file "first-package.mcl":

```text { .m-2 linenos=inline }
$ sudo mgmt run lang first-package.mcl
... ( other output omitted for brevity ) ...
19:00:19 engine: autogroup: pkg[cowsay] into pkg[tmux]
19:00:19 engine: pkg[tmux]: Check: pkg[autogroup:(tmux,cowsay)]
19:00:19 engine: pkg[tmux]: Apply: pkg[autogroup:(tmux,cowsay)]
19:00:19 engine: pkg[tmux]: Set(installed): pkg[autogroup:(tmux,cowsay)]...
19:00:25 engine: pkg[tmux]: Set(installed) success: pkg[autogroup:(tmux,cowsay)]
```

This installed our packages, and mgmt did some extra optimization for us! In this case, mgmt knows that multiple packages can be installed in a single step, so it grouped both tmux and cowsay together. **mgmt calls this "autogrouping"**

> You can test mgmt's reflexes by removing the `cowsay` package and watching mgmt respond by reinstalling it.

Reviewer: reflexes! such a great choice of word!

pkg ["tmux", "cowsay"] {
  state => "installed",
}
```

Types of values like strings and lists will be covered in a later section.

### Services

To finish introducing resources, here is an example that instructs mgmt to ensure the sshd service is running and also enabled on boot.

```puppet { .m-2 }
svc "sshd" {
  startup => "enabled",
  state => "running",
}
```

Running this (as root), we can see mgmt again acting swiftly as it notices that sshd was not enabled at boot nor was it running:

```text { .m-2 }
$ sudo mgmt run lang first-service.mcl
19:08:50 engine: svc[sshd]: service enabled
19:08:50 engine: svc[sshd]: service started
```

## Resource Relationships

We've seen that resources described in _mcl_ will instruct mgmt on what to observe and what the desired state is for each resource. Your desired state may include hundreds or thousands of resources.

When configurating a system, you may need certain steps performed in a specific order. For example: installing a package, changing its configuration file, and ensuring the service is running — in that order! Additionally, if the service configuration changes, you want to notify the service of that change, right?

> 🌶️ Special sauce: In mgmt, **all resources are executed in concurrently**. This allows mgmt to resolve as much as possible in the shortest amount of time. There is no order unless you describe order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
🌶️ Special sauce: In mgmt, **all resources are executed concurrently**. This allows mgmt to resolve as much as possible in the shortest amount of time. There is no order unless you specify order.
```

Because both files want to be "before" each other, we have a loop with no beginning or end, and mgmt will show an error:

```text { .m-2 }
16:53:02 gapi exited with error: not a dag
resource graph has cycles
```

### not a dag? cycles?

The visuals above show small examples of a structure called a graph, and it is how mgmt represents and executes your infrastructure. Graphs have vertexes and edges, and here's how those concepts map to what we've learned about mgmt, so far:

* Vertex: A resource, like a file or pkg.
* Edge: A relationship between two resources.
* Direction: The arrow `->` operator and Before/Depend params

A special kind of graph called a dag is used inside mgmt. A dag, or directed acyclic graph, is a math and computer science term that describes a graph where all edges have a direction and are not allowed to form a path through the graph that allows a loop, or cycle. 

## Programming in mgmt

This section introduces built-in functions, variables, and conditionals. We will use those features to program mgmt to handle differences between Linux distributions.

> So far, we’ve been describing a single desired state - in essence, the resource graph has been static, or unchanging, throughout mgmt's life and remains the same no matter where it runs. Let's do more!

Reviewer: This is a super important concept. Can we elaborate on this more? (Perhaps later in the doc even...)

My main worry is I don't want people to think this is "puppet but in golang" but rather "it's a whole new thing that doesn't exist anywhere yet" ... So telling that story is very important. I think you're doing a great job, thank you!

For our ssh service, Fedora calls it "sshd", and Debian calls it "ssh".

To solve our problem, we will import and use a built-in function, [`os.release`](../../../docs/functions/#os.release), to determine our Linux distribution and use that information to decide which service name to use. 

```puppet { .m-2 }
# Tell mgmt to let us use 'os' functions
import "os"

# Store the os release information in the $release variable
# This information is a 'struct' type that has an "id" field
# The "id" field is a string containing an OS identifier
$release = os.release()

if $release->id == "fedora" {
  # Fedora calls this service "sshd"
  svc "sshd" {
    startup => "enabled",
    state => "running",
  }
} 

# We can handle both Debian and Ubuntu together
if $release->id == "debian" or $release->id == "ubuntu" {
  # Debian calls this service "ssh"
  svc "ssh" {
    startup => "enabled",
    state => "running",
  }
}
```

Our _mcl_ above will produce a different resource graph depending on what machine it runs on.

### Variables

> We used the variable, `$release`, to store the result of `os.release()` function. Variables *immutable* meaning they may only be assigned once, and they are *block scoped*. Here are some examples that use variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We used the variable, `$release`, to store the result of `os.release()` function. Variables are *immutable* meaning they may only be bound once, and they are *block scoped*. Here are some examples that use variables:
```

* Assignment: `$name = "James"`
* In a resource name: `user $name { ... }`
* In a resource param: 
  ```puppet { .m-2 }
  file "/var/cache/james" {
      owner => $name,
  }
  ```
* In a string: `"Hello, ${name}"`
* In a format function: `fmt.printf("Hello, %s", $name)`

#### Formatting Text with Variables

_mcl_ is a strongly-typed language. All values have a type, and parameters are typed. You may find that if you assign a number to a variable, it can't be used where mgmt expects a string. In these cases, you'll want to use the `fmt.printf` function to format the number in a string:

```puppet { .m-2 }
import "fmt"
$port = 8000

file "/etc/nginx/nginx.conf" {
  state => "exists",
  content => fmt.printf("server {\n  listen %d;\n}", $port),
}
```

We needed `fmt.printf()` here because `$port` is a number and cannot be used _as_ a string. For example, if we set the content and try to use `${port}` in inside the content string, we'll get a type error - the following uses will cause mgmt to show an error - `content => "server {\n listen ${port};\n}"`

```text { .m-2 }
17:44:59 error: cli parse error: could not unify types: type error: str != int
```

> Only string values are allowed in `"${variable}"` string interpolation, and `$port`, above, is a number. Most params, such as resource params, function params, etc, accept only a specific type. The documentation for each resource and function will tell you what types are required for each param.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only string values are allowed in `"${variable}"` string interpolation, and `$port`, above, is a number. Most params, such as resource params, function params, etc, accept only a specific type. The documentation for each resource and function will tell you what types are required for each param or arg.
```

(resources have params, functions have args)

#### Scope of Variables

Variables are block scoped, meaning they are not accessible outside of the block where they are assigned. A block is the stuff between `{` and `}`. mgmt will write an error message if a variable doesn't exist.

```puppet { .m-2 }
$release = os.release()
if $release->id == "fedora" {
    $ssh_service = "sshd"
if $release->id == "debian" {
    $ssh_service = "ssh"
}

# This will be an error: 
# '$ssh_service' variable does not exist in this scope
svc $ssh_service {
    startup => "enabled",
    state => "running",
}
```

mgmt will report that the variable doesn't exist:

```text { .m-2 }
17:54:57 cli: lang: ast: var `$ssh_service` does not exist in this scope: variable-scope-error.mcl @ 11:5-11:17

svc $ssh_service {
    ^^^^^^^^^^^^

> ```

Reviewer: Great example! Do we want to follow-up right here by showing the correct solution like:

```mcl

$release = os.release()

$ssh_service = if $release->id == "fedora" {
    "sshd"
} else {
    "ssh"
}

```

Author: Yessss! See I didn’t even know that an if was an expression! I had a solution that used a function but didn’t like it. I will include this as it highlights a good feature

Reviewer: doh! see this is why we need your eyes. There's an if statement and an if expr. Different code, same name :P

Author: Updated and now including this example as a "how to fix this" <3

### Functions

> Functions are a way to perform computation and also a way observe parts of your system without making changes. Like resources, function values may change in real-time.

Reviewer: > Like resources, function values may change in real-time.

The "like resources" part, is that correct? I think we should rephrase.

Author: Yeah I agree the phrasing isn't right. I'm trying to convey the idea that function (results) and resource (observations/watches)  can change throughout the life of a single mgmt process.

Author: I've done a bit of rewriting and I think this is now addressed. I dont' have any "like resources" phrasing anymore, best I can tell.

> ⁉️Questions for the editor 
> 

> > Question: Do all functions have a 'streaming' aspect where their values can change over time? If not, how would a user know? Should they not care?

Reviewer: They all technically (internally) have a stream, that stream may only ever produce one value though and then it might shutdown. Some may produce an infinite number, and some may produce some finite, indeterminate number.

They should care, and reading the docs for that function should tell them if it's not obvious. Any functions that don't have the appropriate docs here are a bug.

Author: I've done a bit of editing on the intro to the functions section which I hope gets us closer to teaching the streaming aspect of functions.

> Just like *resources*, **function** results can change, in real time, reflecting observations of your machine.

Reviewer: Re above and resources changing, perhaps rephrase?

The simplest example is time: mgmt's _datetime_ functions observe the clock and report the time. Ever marching forward, time functions will produce new values as the clock changes. Let's try a small example using the _print_ resource to have mgmt log a message with the current time:

```puppet { .m-2 }
import "fmt"
import "datetime"

$now = datetime.now()

print "time check" {
  msg => fmt.printf("The current time is %s", datetime.format($now, "2006-01-02 15:04:05")),
}
```

This is the first example where mgmt truly begins to shine! 

> The variable `$now` stores the result of the `datetime.now()` function, and that function's result changes periodically. A new function result causes a chain reaction: A new `datetime.now()` result transitively changes the `msg` setting for our _print_ resource!

Reviewer: chain reaction! well described!

svc $ssh_service {
	startup => "enabled",
	state => "running",
}
```

mgmt will report that the variable doesn't exist:

```text { .m-2 }
17:54:57 cli: lang: ast: var `$ssh_service` does not exist in this scope: variable-scope-error.mcl @ 11:5-11:17

svc $ssh_service {
    ^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

With a small change, we can fix the above example. In _mcl_, an `if` can also be an expression, and expressions can be assigned to variables:

```puppet { .m-2 }
import "os"
$release = os.release()

$ssh_service = if $release->id == "fedora" {
	"sshd"
} else {
	# assume all other distros call it "ssh"
	"ssh"
}

svc [$ssh_service] {
	startup => "enabled",
	state => "running",
}
```

Previously, you learned that resource definitions can accept a list of names or, for convenience, a single string literal. In our current example, we used an `if` expression to store a string in the `$ssh_service` variable, and because the _name_ parameter accepts a list of strings, we need provide a list: `[$ssh_service]`.

Before we move on, you might wonder, what happens if we use the wrong type? Let's try that. If we forget the brackets for the resource name and use:

```puppet { .m-2 }
svc $ssh_service {
```

> mgmt will report the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mgmt may report the following if it can't statically determine that $ssh_service is a string:
```

If you're not sure, using a list of strings as a resource or edge name is best. We do our best to detect the easy cases to make declaring resources easier. You mar or may not want the above kind of edit. Not sure if I wrote it in this style, I mention it because I was trying to make that example work statically haha, so if I succeed this week, this would just compile =D

Author: Added!
